- A tower?
- I need it completed by spring.
Have you considered
seeking partners outside
the confines of our own race?
Tell me about your King's proposal
so I can present it to my father.
I'd sense it
if he were hiding something.
Perhaps he sensed that
it was you who was hiding something.
What is this place?
The Island Kingdom of Númenor.
I was thinking I might defer.
When the Sea Trial begins
and that ship launches.
you will be on it.
I don't want any trouble.
It is a map of the South lands.
It speaks not only of a place. but a plan.
To create a realm of their own.
Then the South lands are in grave danger.
If Sauron has indeed returned.
the South lands are but the beginning.
If there are any of you here
who want to live...
...we make for the Elven tower
at first light.
Bring him to Adar.
Adar!
Sauron was said to have
many names in days of old.
Perhaps this is one of them.
Your people have no king.
for you are him.
Come with me to Middle-earth.
You're still short an army.
That is all about to change.
In this court.
we gather daily
to hammer out our island's future.
But at the Blessing of the Children.
we gather to welcome those
who will live that future.
One as boundless as a sunrise
over the rolling sea.
What name have you chosen for her?
Alinel.
May Númenor's strength arise in thee.
Her wisdom guide thy steps...
Sometimes our island just needs a stretch.
Just like you.
It is a perfect day. Queen Regent.
What business would you begin with?
She summoned the Elf to court.
Just this morning.
Elf's mate attacks four guildsmen.
and Míriel has her up for tea?
Probably she called
the Elf in to punish her.
Or to ask her for orders.
And while the Elf whispers poison
in our Queen's ear.
who's speaking for us?
Chancellor! Chancellor!
Send her my regards. will you?
Keep your voice down.
Would you like one. sir?
Come on. sir.
I didn't realize you were in the middle
of something important.
Chancellor!
Statecraft is the art
of attending to small matters
as diligently as grand ones.
I should like to think
you'd learned that by now.
I was only trying to be clever.
Cleverness is for men
of small ambition.
I'd much rather it
if you were wise. my son.
Now. what seems to be the trouble. hmm?
We may have a bit of a squall
on our hands.
Elf ships on our shore?
Elf workers taking your trades?
Workers who don't sleep.
don't tire. don't age.
No!
I say. the Queen's either blind
or an Elf lover.
Just like her father.
- Elf lover!
Elf lover!
Elf lover! Elf lover!
And if the Elf were here now.
what would she see?
Men of Númenor.
or a gaggle of mewling children?
We are sons and daughters of the Edain.
Of Elros Tar-Minyatur. whose host
conquered Morgoth himself.
But now one Elf. a castaway.
could threaten us?
Look down. each of you.
at the guild crests you bear.
The heritage of mighty hands.
Of men who laid the Sea Wall.
Who raised Armenelos.
triumph of our civilization.
But now. one Elf could threaten us?
My friends...
Trust in me.
For by the calluses on my hands.
I swear that Elven hands
will never take Númenor's helm.
She will remain. as always.
a kingdom of Men.
Drinks all around!
Pharazôn! Pharazôn!
Isn't a name in this city he doesn't know.
a crowd he can't turn.
a favor he isn't owed...
It's impressive.
I was going to say "infuriating."
From vineyards near the Meneltarma.
Supposed to make you forget your troubles.
Or so they say.
My troubles have been too hard-won.
You must be the new apprentice.
I'm Kemen. And your name is...
Hey. Eärien. Plans. now.
Oh.
You vex me. Elf.
I welcome you as a guest.
and you gallop off to our countryside
to steal ancient scrolls
whilst your Southlander companion
assaults our citizenry.
He is understandably quick to temper.
His people are dying.
"His people"?
I believe the man you hold
in your dungeons is no common brawler.
but the lost heir in exile
to the throne of the South lands.
And I suppose Elendil here
is a Rhûnic emperor.
Just a petty lord. actually.
His people are scattered. Leaderless.
But with your backing they might unite
behind his banner. And fight.
What do you mean "backing"?
Sauron was once your people's enemy.
as much as mine.
I call on you
to finish the task left undone.
To reforge the alliance
between Númenor and Elves...
And fight with me.
to save the men of the South lands
before Sauron claims their lands
for his own.
In this court we hear many proposals.
I dare say yours is the most surprising
and ambitious I've heard in weeks.
Nevertheless. Númenor has chosen
another path.
Not all Númenor.
King or carpenter.
the Southlander will face judgment.
This audience is ended.
Then I have little choice.
but to ask for another.
One with Númenor's true ruler.
Your father. the King.
You should not speak of matters
you do not understand.
Galadriel. daughter of Finarfin.
And you should stand aside.
that I might present my proposal to one
who holds the authority to answer it.
Lady Galadriel. that is quite enough.
And with what authority do you speak. Elf?
That of your people?
Or are you a castaway.
grasping for a handhold in a tempest?
There is a tempest in me.
It swept me to this island for a reason.
And it will not be quelled by you. Regent.
Don't tell me.
Tavern brawl?
Sedition.
You've nearly made it!
In a few more days.
I'll have the pleasure
of calling all of you shipmates.
Pull now. cadets! Pull!
Isildur...
Pull now. cadets!
Pull!
Line!
Explain yourselves.
Sir. no. there must be
some sort of mistake.
It was my fault. Sea-master.
I let it slip.
I've seen you ease that halyard
proper a hundred times.
That was deliberate.
You're off the Sea Guard!
All three of you!
"The West"? "The real Númenor"?
That garbage your brother
used to spew. again!
I thought the sail-master
would only dismiss me.
I'm sorry.
You're sorry?
You just set our whole lives on fire!
Where's that chamber pot?
I think I'm gonna be sick.
I will speak to my father.
Convince him to see
that you're both reinstated.
No. Leave it to you to get kicked out
of something
you never earned in the first place.
- Valandil...
- No.
Since I was big enough to hold an oar.
I wanted on that boat.
I did everything I was supposed to do
to earn it. And what did you do?
What have you ever done but brood
and blabber about your dead mother.
Stop it! Stop it! Enough!
Yeah. same old Isil walking away.
Isil! Where are you going?
Going. staying. what does it matter?
The real problem is him.
And that's not going anywhere.
Magrot!
Adar...
Nampak uglursha.
Where were you born.
soldier?
Beleriand.
By the mouth of the river?
Who are you?
I went down that river once...
When I was young.
I remember...
The banks were covered in sage blossoms.
Miles of them.
Why do the Orcs call you Father?
You have been told many lies.
Some run so deep.
even the rocks and roots now believe them.
To untangle it all...
would all but require the creation
of a new world.
But that is something
only the gods can do.
And I am no god. At least...
Not yet.
What are you?
Go to the Men who have taken refuge
in the old watchtower.
Deliver to them a message.
What message?
The barracks are already full.
Try and make camp where you can.
- Where's this lot from?
- I or bad.
That makes it every village
from here to Orodruin.
Where's the rest?
That is the rest.
We'll have to cut rations again.
You're not cutting my rations.
Who gave you the right to decide?
Everyone who decided to come
to this tower. Waldreg. Including you.
What will we eat?
- We'll find a way.
- How?
- I don't know.
- Huh. Plain enough to see that.
What about Waldreg's root cellar?
We send a small party into town.
By day. when the Orcs are fewer.
grab what we can. quick and quiet.
They'll never even know we were there.
What poor sod will you rope into that?
I'll do it. if nobody else will.
You're not going down there.
We'll forage the hills again first.
Gather the hunters.
And what will they hunt? A few rabbits?
That'll feed us a day.
Then it's another day.
And let us be grateful for it.
I'm sick and tired
of watching everything go to tatters
and not doing anything about it.
- We are doing everything we can.
- Well. I'm not!
Theo. Theo!
You can either help me
or you can make it harder.
I should never have let you
talk me into this.
I'm heading back.
Don't be such a soft-belly.
Come on.
Rowan. the tavern.
I'm not going in there.
There might be more food.
Come on. this place is deserted.
All right. I'll go.
Rowan?
Young blood.
Where'd you get that?
Give it here.
Oi! I found it!
I found it! It's a boy! He has the hilt!
A boy? Where is he?
He's hiding here somewhere.
You! Send word to Lord-father.
Rest of you. fan out.
Nobody sleeps till he's found.
Got ya!
Elves and Dwarves working together.
Remarkable.
It is everything you said it would be.
What?
Nothing. Just...
For a moment. standing there.
you were the very image of your father.
I wasn't aware
you'd ever met him.
Of course. many times.
He had that way of seeing far off.
Do you know. I remember once.
he said to me.
one day. my future would be
in his son's hands.
He said it quite casually.
as if one might speak of tomorrow's rain.
And I've... I've...
I'd forgotten that until...
Till this moment.
Isn't that odd?
You seem unsettled today. my lord.
What troubles you?
No. I promised myself I wouldn't
mention it. He's your friend.
Durin.
Either he's avoiding me
or he's... he's hiding something.
Did you try asking his work teams?
All nineteen of them.
They keep putting me off.
One would almost think it suspicious.
Are you suggesting Durin's got himself
a wee girlfriend?
- There is none other than you. milady.
- I know.
Who'd have him?
Rich crone. kiss the stone
Polish your gems and gold
Ow! Stop it!
Gerda. stop hitting your brother!
We're playing the knocking game.
Well. knock it off.
Have you tried the Golden Stairs?
Or the Three-door Guard?
I'd forgotten.
These wee'ns are turning my mind to mush.
He was off to mine Quartz Chasm today.
You know. Disa. there is no secret
worth concealing with deception.
Calling a Dwarf dishonest in her own home?
That's a recipe for strong gravy.
If Durin is mining quartz.
why would he leave
without taking his chiseling axe?
And why would you prepare
his favorite meal
if he's gone to a chasm
that takes two full days to descend to?
Rich crone. kiss the stone
Polish your gems and gold
Gerda. I'm warning you!
Durin didn't bring his axe
because the quartz he's mining
isn't chiseled. It is pried.
I am making mole-tail stew
because it needs a wee while to set
before he's home.
And while it may take several days
for an outsider. such as you.
Dwarven climbers like my husband
can make the descent to Quartz Chasm
in just a few hours.
Was there anything else
you wanted to ask about. dearie?
No.
Thank you.
Quartz Chasm. Not bad. Not bad.
I just hope he believed me.
He's not easily taken in. that Elf.
Certainly not.
Lucky my future queen could convince
a water rat to wear a mink coat.
One more reason to count my blessings
I married you. not Margid Rustborin.
And what are the other reasons?
I'll tell you later.
Hush now. We better keep our pipes down.
Mm-hmm.
We're making good progress
in the old mine.
I made sure he was escorted out...
The old mine
below the Mirrormere.
You lost. Elf?
Hmm?
No. I know exactly where I'm going.
Good day.
Rich crone. kiss the stone.
Polish your gems and gold.
I knew it!
Durin?
- Came to spy on me. Elf?
- Hardly.
What is this place?
You really expect me
to believe you do not know?
That this was not the true reason
he sent you here to begin with?
You want it for yourselves.
Durin. want what?
I care nothing for whatever
is in that chamber.
I do care for you. for this friendship.
And secrets do not become it.
What is the meaning of all this? Mm?
I need your oath.
Hand to mountain.
you'll never breathe so much as a whisper
of what I'm about to tell you
to another living soul.
Dwarven anger outlives even Elven memory.
Break your promise.
and the power of this stone
will doom you and your kin to sorrow.
to your last day on this Middle-earth.
Do you swear it. Elrond?
I swear on the memory
of my father. Eärendil the Mariner.
Anything you tell me here
will end in my ears alone.
Disa detected it
during a routine gold-seaming.
A new ore.
Lighter than silk. harder than iron.
as weaponry.
it would best our proudest blades.
As specie. it might be dearer than gold.
It is strange how it catches the light.
Almost seems lit from within.
I tell you. this could be the beginning
of a new era for our people.
Strength. prosperity...
Then why all the secrecy?
Why not celebrate this?
It's perilous to mine.
My father has restricted our every efforts
in the name of caution.
May I?
What do you call this miracle ore?
In our tongue. "gray glitter."
In yours. something like mith-raud.
No. no. It would be...
mithril.
So you really did come all this way
just for Eregion?
I came because 20 years
is far too long to stay away.
Even for an Elf.
Oh.
Keep it.
Token of our friendship.
Very well.
No!
Durin! Durin! Durin. no!
There's four Dwarves down there!
Durin!
Eärien. floors and goblets.
- Ooh!
- Oh!
I'm so sorry.
It's all right. It's all right.
It's... It's... It's all right. honestly.
And here I thought your talents
ended at draftsmanship.
Scrubbing is good for dexterity.
Or so the guild master says.
So. how about this?
I'll do the floors. you do the goblets.
And the last one to finish
pays for dinner.
I'm not in the habit of going off
with strange young men.
Very wise. If I see any.
you'll be the first to know.
As much as I admire your habit of charging
at every obstacle in your path.
like a colt in full gallop...
Has it ever occurred to you
that you're not battling trolls or Orcs.
but Men?
Are you really about to advise me
in the art of war?
No. No. I...
I wouldn't dare. But then...
The queen's court isn't exactly
your usual battlefield. is it?
Go on.
In an instance like this. it seems to me
that you'd do well to identify what it is
that your opponent most fears.
- And exploit it?
- No.
Give them a means of mastering it.
So that you can master them.
So by your standards. I'm in this cell.
because I've yet to identify
what the queen most fears?
My very low standards. Yes.
And I suppose you did.
having met her for all of a few moments?
During which you managed to demand a ship.
insult her people. defy her orders.
none of which quickened her pulse.
Now. all of a sudden.
she throws you in a cell.
Why?
I asked her to fight for your people.
But that wasn't what provoked her anger.
was it?
I demanded to speak with her father.
The king in the tower.
whom no one has seen in years.
See what happens when you stop galloping
and you give yourself a moment to think?
Cease comparing me to a horse.
Cease trying to convince me
to leave this island an you have a deal.
Salutations. Elf.
The Queen Regent
has rendered her decision.
You are to be shipped back to the Elves
under armed escort. Tonight.
Step forward.
- I wouldn't advise that.
- I can't very well let her leave.
You could.
If you knew exactly where she was going.
What are you doing up here?
I had a dinner.
Who is he?
Where's your uniform?
Resigned from the cadets. did you?
No. worse.
You got dismissed?
Got us all dismissed.
Isil...
Well. you've won. Now you can go west.
I just ruined my friends' lives.
shamed our family name.
I don't deserve to go west.
Plus. Father won't let me take Berek.
It's the Elf! She's escaped.
Search every alley.
Apologies. Your Majesty.
for the intrusion. But I...
He no longer answers to that.
How did you know I would come here?
A garrison of troops awaits outside
to escort you to your ship.
You would be wise to go willingly.
Míriel.
I... I...
It's all right. Father. I'm here.
Forgive me.
I did not know.
Few know the full extent of his decline.
I should like to keep it that way.
Then it is time for truth between us.
Your father was loyal to the Elvish ways.
Why are you not?
Tell me.
Please.
My father was always restrained
in his beliefs.
But after his coronation.
something changed.
He became strident.
proclaiming that we'd provoked
the anger of the Valar.
and must repent.
and return to the old ways.
There was unease.
And when he announced plans
to renew relations with the Elves...
The people rebelled.
Much was lost.
I was chosen to rule in his stead.
with a promise to quell the storm.
But that first night.
as all Númenor slept.
he brought me here.
Palantír.
Seven Seeing Stones there once were.
The other six either lost or hidden.
This one was passed to my father.
And with it. a secret.
Place your hand upon it.
- I must warn you...
- I have touched palantíri before.
But you have not touched this one.
It is Númenor's future you saw.
Palantíri show many visions.
Some that will never come to pass.
It has already come to pass.
The vision begins with your arrival.
And you believe I will bring about
Númenor's downfall?
Only Númenor can bring about her downfall.
The Valar gifted us this isle
in a day of virtue.
They can take it away should we turn
to the paths of darkness.
The virtue you speak of
was your ancestors' loyalty to the Elves.
My father believed that.
His path nearly destroyed us.
That is why. tomorrow.
I will announce that you are gone.
And this crisis ended.
If the evil rising in Middle-earth
is left unchecked.
it will spread and take us all.
Avoiding this war may be the very thing
that brings about your downfall.
I will not second-guess the gods.
My decision is final.
A decision based in fear.
I know what it is to be the only one.
the only one who sees.
the only one who knows.
Perhaps neither of us have
to bear that burden alone any longer.
I beg of you. Míriel.
choose not the path of fear.
but that of faith.
Stand with me.
Let Númenor fight
alongside the Elves once more.
Faith may bind one heart. Galadriel.
But it is too fine a thread
from which to hang a kingdom.
I'm sorry.
Woods are all bare. Animals are all fled.
Seems your boy had more sense
than we allowed.
There's someone at the gates!
Stand back.
- Move out of the way. Stand back!
- Let the lad through!
There's plenty. Slow down!
Rowan! Where's Theo?
He said he'd be right behind me.
- I'm so hungry!
- Stop pushing!
She pushed me!
We've turned over every stone.
He ain't back here.
Come on.
Where is he?
He's not here!
Let's go.
Leave no stone unturned.
Boss will skin us alive
if we don't find him.
Boss is the one who lost him
in the first place.
Izmûmbogh...
Come on!
Kishdibatoth! Kishdibatoth.
Kishdibatoth.
Find him!
Nothin' here.
Over there! Look!
Going somewhere.
young blood. are we?
Where is it?
No!
Where have you got it?
Maybe losing your arm
will loosen your lips.
- Swiftly. lad.
- Over there! Get him!
They are coming.
Keep going.
Run!
Mother?
Bronwyn.
Run! Get to the clearing!
What was that?
It was a plea to the rocks
to release the bodies of the miners
with breath still inside them.
I cannot stop thinking
that if you'd not gone down there.
Durin might have been
in that shaft when it...
I'm sorry.
I'm sorry I lied to you.
You were faithful to my friend.
That is all we need remember.
They just pulled out the last one.
Alive. All of them alive.
Your father must be so relieved.
He shut it down.
The whole vein is to be sealed off.
- The whole vein?
- All of it.
Give him time.
Even the hottest coals eventually cool.
Yeah. but sometimes I wish they wouldn't.
Sometimes I wish I could tell him
exactly what I think of him.
and never trade words
with the old goat again!
My father single-handedly
sailed to Valinor.
and convinced the Valar to join the war
and vanquish Morgoth.
So great were his deeds
that the Valar lifted him
beyond the bounds of this world...
To forever carry the Evening Star
across the sky.
For many years. at day's end.
I would look up at it...
Wondering what might he think
if he were watching me.
Would he be proud
of what I've accomplished with his legacy?
Or disappointed by the countless ways
I'd failed to live up to it?
But then. one night. it struck me
that I would be only too happy
to hear any judgment.
so long as it granted me the opportunity
to have but one more conversation
with my father.
Do not waste
what time you have left with yours.
Elrond. I was hopeful you might be able
to settle something.
How is it that you and my husband met?
I told you. I saved him from a hill-troll.
- Two of 'em.
- Two of 'em. Yes. I know.
Mmm-hmm.
I was asking Elrond.
Then I fear I have no choice
but to amend your husband's account.
There were three trolls.
And it was I who saved him.
You wouldn't remember your face
if you were gazing in a mirror.
When I came upon him
in the forest.
he was in the midst
of dodging their mallet blows.
- Wailing and screaming and such.
- It was a battle cry.
The screams were so high-pitched.
I thought it was a child.
So I took up my bow...
- Uh. it was a sword.
- It was a bow.
- Nah! It was a sword!
- Regardless...
Forgive me. Father.
I was proud and stubborn and I was wrong.
Can you not even look at me?
Our people believe...
That when a new Dwarf-king is crowned.
the voices of all his forebearers
flow into him.
sharing with him their counsel
and wisdom.
Even their mistakes.
But you...
You need not wait for that day
to hear my voice.
For. ever am I with you. my son.
Even in anger.
Sometimes. in anger most of all.
There is nothing to forgive.
Elrond has invited me
to go with him to Lindon tomorrow.
Shall I accept?
Elrond has been very convincing
in his assurances
that Gil-galad bore no ill intent
when he sent him here.
Aye. He has.
But intuition's a powerful tonic.
What does yours tell you?
There is something more at work.
Good. my son.
Good.
Go to Lindon.
Find out what.
Thank you.
What is it? What's wrong?
I have a message.
From the one who commands our enemy.
That your people may live
if you forsake all claim to these lands...
And swear fealty to him.
And if we refuse?
He's coming for Ostirith.
Come on.
If you ask me. you deserve a nip
of mash after what you done.
Go on. take it.
Just like you took that hilt from me barn.
Uh... I don't know what...
Come off it. lad.
You know of what I speak.
Do you know what it is? It is no sword.
It is a power.
Fashioned for our ancestors
by his master's own hand.
A beautiful servant.
He who was lost. but shall return.
Have you heard of him. lad?
Have you heard of Sauron?
You must have seen it in the skies.
A few weeks back now.
The star fall.
It means his time is near.
And it is to you and me. lad. to be ready.
Ready for what?
Hush now. lad.
You save your strength.
You'll need it.
For what's coming.
Lord-father...
We found it.
It's in the tower.
Go in peace.
Your people will be relieved.
They will be gathering soon in the court.
and in the plaza.
to hear your announcement.
Then we ought not to keep them.
The faithful believe that
when the petals of the White Tree fall
it is no idle thing.
but the very tears
of the Valar themselves.
a living reminder that their eyes
and their judgment are ever upon us.
There is a fateful hour
in the destinies of men.
An hour of judgment
in which each of us. every one.
must decide who we shall be.
Are our hearts become
as the statues that surround our isle?
Or do they yet beat with the blood
of the heroes that carved them?
Is our valor confined to the graves
of our slumbering fathers?
Or is it here.
amongst us even now...
Waiting to burst forth as the rising Sun?
I would neither command. nor invite you
to any danger I myself would not face.
And so. I've decided to personally
escort the Elf back to Middle-earth.
To aid our mortal brethren
who are now besieged in the South lands.
Your queen
has laid bare her intent.
Our ships will depart in ten days.
The expeditionary force will be made up
of brave sons and daughters
from across fair Númenor.
Who is willing to commit themselves
to our Queen Regent's protection?
Step forward and make yourself known.
I will serve.
I will serve!